hi folks tonight we're going to use the
do-it-yourself hat cam tack on a Doppler
run of a per dose this is a nice video
on youtube and you can find it at this
link if you're interested let's take a
look looks good okay in order to do
these calculations we need to know more
about the Doppler effect and generally
that just means that objects moving
towards you sound like they have a
higher frequency and objects moving away
from you sound like they have a lower
frequency for more information you can
check Wikipedia and will also need for
these calculations to know what the
speed of sound is when we make these
recordings the speed of sound depends
primarily on the temperature and we can
use a formula here this one to calculate
what that speed would be it's based on a
novel speed of 331 meters per second in
a calculation which involves the
temperature V and we compute the square
root of 1 plus V over 273 and the
temperature is in Celsius so if you need
to convert that you can use a unit
converter and I've done that already I
have assumed this video was recorded at
77 degrees Fahrenheit which would be 25
degrees Celsius I've done the
calculation and that works out 2 340 6
meters per second which is equivalent to
roughly
774 miles per hour let's look at
audacity now and this is the audio track
from that video the section which have
highlighted in gray is the past that we
just looked at so let's zoom in on that
let me see here that the helicopter
becomes louder as it approaches the
camera and becomes quieter as it gets
further away likewise the frequency will
be increased as it approaches and begin
to decrease as it departs let's look at
the spectrogram for this as we discussed
previously the main blade rate is
running around approximately 100 Hertz
which would be 3000 rpm but we can get
more accurate measurements if we look at
harmonics of that signal and there's a
nice one here at around eight hundred
and fifty Hertz which drops down to say
775 which we can use in this calculation
because it's based on the relative
frequencies of approaching and departing
signals so I'm going to select this
initial section at around fifty three
and a half seconds into the video and
plot the spectrum here we see there is a
measurement of 850 6 hertz on that line
as the helicopter approaches the camera
and as it moves away we can find the
frequency has dropped to 700 and say 40
Hertz now the calculation for the speed
is based on the frequency approaching
minus the frequency departing all
divided by the frequency approaching
plus the frequency departing and we
multiply that by the speed of sound that
we're interested in let's do the
calculation now 856 hurts minus seven
hundred and forty Hertz / 856 hurts plus
seven hundred and forty Hertz x 774
miles per hour tells us that the
helicopter was traveling at 56 miles per
hour on that pass this is roughly the
same as 100 kilometers an hour which is
what the poster of the original video
had thought